From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the daily.
[Music]
The president spoke with reporters. He
says that the US will have a golden
share in US deal. Shares of rare earth
producer MP materials on pace for their
best day in history. DoD will be MP's
largest shareholder. After
>> Nvidia and AMD have agreed to give the
US government 15% of the revenue.
>> In a series of extraordinary deals,
President Trump has muscled himself
directly into the business of corporate
America.
>> Friday night breaking news. It's on
Intel. Intel stock is
>> including making the US government the
largest shareholder of Intel, one of the
most iconic companies in the country. It
really is almost uncharted territory, is
it?
>> It's a move that's been praised by
Bernie Sanders and criticized by
conservatives as socialism.
Today, my colleague Andrew Ross Sorcin
on what all this means and how it could
reshape America's approach to
capitalism.
[Music]
It's Tuesday, September 2nd.
Andrew, we've seen Trump insert the
government into US companies in a bunch
of ways in the last few months, but the
recent news that the US government was
taking this ownership stake in Intel is
the thing that convinced us we had to
come to you. This was the bombshell.
This is a major corporation and this
kind of move is just extremely rare. and
you as our resident expert on all things
corporate America have been trying to
make sense of it.
>> There's no question that the decision by
the administration to take a 10% stake
in Intel is a watershed. It's a
watershed not just for the world of
business but for the much larger idea
around capitalism
>> around free markets
around the idea that the United States
has spent the last century exporting the
concept of free market capitalism and
has been critical of state-run
capitalism.
And in so many ways, even politically,
this flips the entire script of the
approach that Republicans and
conservatives have taken towards
business for so many years. I can't tell
you how many business leaders I've
spoken to over the last several days who
are looking at this and have so many
questions have so many questions not
just about the particulars of the US
taking stake in this company but in what
it portends
what it means. You know, the last time
we saw anything like this, and really
the only times this has ever happened in
American history where the US
government's gotten this engaged in
business, it's been in the context of a
crisis.
>> We had this happen in 2008 with the
investment banks, with the automobile
makers. But it happened because those
companies were considered in absolute
distress and that the effect of letting
them go bankrupt was going to be
cataclysmic
for the rest of the country and its
economy.
>> Right. The idea then was that these
banks were too big to fail.
Incidentally, the title of your book on
this subject, the idea was this was
necessary to contain major economic
fallout.
>> Exactly. And look, that moment unto
itself created all sorts of debates
around the country that last even till
this day around the very idea of
bailouts and how the government should
or should not be involved in the world
of business. And so here we have this
example of Intel which is just the
latest in a string of transactions in
which the US government has taken
effectively stakes in businesses or
otherwise collecting tolls or other
things that they haven't done before at
a time when we're not in crisis and how
that may rewrite the rules of
capitalism. So let's talk about how all
this started. You mentioned that Intel
is part of this string of transactions.
Take me through that.
>> So earlier this year we saw Nippon,
which is a steel maker in Japan, try to
buy US steel. And the president stepped
in and said, "I'll approve this deal,
but I'll only approve this deal if the
United States gets what's called a
golden share." So this is a special
share that has certain governance powers
>> which effectively allow the US
government in many cases to control what
Nipon Steel does with US steel in the
future.
>> How so? In what way?
>> Well, for example, if the US government
decides that Nippon wants to close down
a factory that's owned by US Steel, they
could say no. In certain cases, they may
try to even be able to require Nipon
Steel to make investments in ways that
Nip on Steel wouldn't normally. So, it
just changes the complete dynamic of the
business.
>> Right.
>> And then in July, we saw the Pentagon
take a stake in a rare earth's minerals
company, which is something we've also
never seen the government do in this
kind of context. And then after that, we
saw an even more unique transaction.
Trump administration officials, you
know, they had been railing about how we
should not allow our chip makers to
export their chips to China,
>> right? It was prohibited.
>> It was prohibited until the CEO of
Nvidia goes to the White House and makes
the case to the president that they
should be able to sell less advanced
chips in China,
>> right?
>> And the president says, "You know what?
Okay, I'll let you do that, but you are
going to pay me. You're going to pay the
US government a 15% tax on those chips.
Now, some people look at that and say
that's a 15% vig.
>> What's a vague?
>> A vig is like what the mafia would do.
You take a vig.
>> Uh-huh. Like extortion.
>> I mean, that's one way to I'm being
polite about it, but you can sell the
chips, but we're going to take a piece
of the action. We're going to take 15%
of every chip that you sell.
>> It's also just, as you said, it's a tax,
right? which is not something that
Republicans typically want to do. Tax
corporations,
>> it's the antithesis of what they've
talked about for all of these years. You
know, Ronald Reagan has a famous quote
where he says, "The nine most terrifying
words in the English language are, I'm
from the government and I'm here to
help."
And here we are in a situation now where
a Republican president is saying the US
government is here to help and not just
here to help. We want to own you.
>> And then we get this intel deal.
>> And that was really the biggest
bombshell of all. And let me go
backwards just a minute to give you the
backstory of that because unto itself I
think it's fascinating and it has the
entire business world wondering what
comes next. In this instance, Fox News
does a report.
>> The CEO's name is Lip Bhutan
>> about the CEO of Intel.
He was formerly the head of Cadence
Design Systems, a software company
enabling chip design, but it was found
guilty of violating export control,
selling the technology at Cadence Design
to a Chinese military university,
>> alleging and claiming that he has ties
to the Chinese government. And that
report sets off President Trump to the
point where he literally takes to truth
social. On Truth Social, President Trump
wrote, "The CEO of Intel is highly
conflicted and must resign immediately.
There is no other solution to this
problem."
>> Questioning the CEO whether he should be
the CEO of Intel and what's happening at
Intel. And remember, importantly, Intel
was a recipient of billions of dollars
of grants from the chips act in 2022
during the Biden administration where
they had committed to build advanced
chips and what are called foundaries in
the United States. And that came after
CO where we decided as a country that we
needed to have a more resilient supply
chain. We couldn't rely on all of the
major important chips being manufactured
in Taiwan. And so Intel is literally
building huge manufacturing facilities
in places like Arizona with the
expectation that this grant money is
coming their way.
>> So they have a lot at stake in all of
this.
>> All the construction workers are there
and they're just waiting for more checks
to keep coming for years,
>> right? So the CEO of Intel is now under
fire in the biggest way because you have
the president of the United States
criticizing him, criticizing Intel,
and he and the board of Intel go into
crisis management mode. And what do they
tell him to do? They say, "Go try to
take a meeting with the president of the
United States in the White House. This
president loves to meet with CEOs. Call
the White House and get a meeting." like
make this go away. This needs to be
solved.
>> Somehow make this go away because if it
doesn't go away, the CEO might lose his
job and he would go away. So the CEO
goes to the White House, sits in the
Oval Office with President Trump and
makes his case.
And in the context of making his case
for himself, for the company, the
president has a suggestion. Well, you
know, we're giving you all of this
money. And by the way, there's still
billions of dollars in grant money that
has been allocated to you, but we have
not sent the check yet, so you're going
to still need that money. I think the US
government, given the fact that we're
helping you so much, should own a piece
of your company. the CEO given I think
all of the pressures around him against
him personally and the pressure on the
company and the pressure on the board
says okay
>> wow
>> and so the president then takes to truth
social and says that we the US taxpayer
has just gotten 10% of the company and
he says that we got it for free?
I mean,
>> did we get it for free?
>> It's a good question. Sort of. We had
committed and allocated this money as
part of the chips act to Intel. That
money was supposed to go to Intel
anyway. Intel now is justifying its
decision to give the 10%.
In part because if you were to add up
all of the dollars that the US
government had granted the company, it
would buy you the equivalent of 10% of
the company.
>> Do we know why Trump is doing these
deals like with Intel, but also with
these other companies that we talked
about? Is there a motivation that ties
all of this together? You know, if
there's a throughine to all of this,
it's the general concept that Trump
believes, as he has articulated for
decades, that he believes the US
government and the taxpayer is
ultimately getting ripped off and is
often times getting ripped off by
businesses
and in many cases getting ripped off by
other countries. That's the rationale,
for example, behind the tariffs,
>> right? and he's somebody who's saying
there's no free lunch. If the taxpayer
is going to give a business money, the
taxpayer should get something directly
from it. Historically,
the philosophy of grants, for example,
was that the US economy and therefore
the taxpayer indirectly would be a
beneficiary of giving various grants to
different industries or businesses or
whatnot. Sometimes we've wanted to
increase innovation in EVs and so we've
subsidized that in the in the past or
windmills, something the president is
against, but we never asked for
something directly in return because
what we were getting in return was
hopefully a larger economic benefit.
>> And in this case, Trump is saying we,
the American taxpayer, the American
government, we need something much more
tangible than that. very much so. He
wants to be able to say, "I gave out x
amount of money and I can look right
here and I can do the math and I can
show you that we got x amount back and
then some."
>> And it's not just money compensation
that he's getting in these deals. He and
the US government are also getting
control. Control over these companies,
sway over their decisions. This is
something that we've seen the Trump
administration do over and over again
with a bunch of institutions in this
country. In this case, what is that
control about?
>> There's two things going on here. One is
this issue of national security. The
president has been very outspoken about
his worries that China is going to one
day take over Taiwan. And if that
happens, the US is going to be in a real
problem spot because most advanced chips
in the world are made there. And so he
says to himself that he needs to have
more control over the idea that Intel is
going to have success in the United
States and he would like to have a hand
in that.
There's another issue which is just
broader that has almost nothing to do
with national security and is everything
to do with what President Trump would
call the art of the deal. You use the
word control. He might use the word
leverage.
>> He likes to have leverage over somebody
else, over a company, over an
individual, over a country. and he is
now finding every opportunity he can to
create that leverage.
>> He doesn't have to be able to use the
leverage. He may not even know what he
wants from the leverage. But leverage
creates optionality.
That's the negotiating theory of the
case.
>> But on the other hand, Trump isn't
running a company. He is the president
of America. and the tools that he's
doing to get leverage in these cases.
The extent of the government
intervention, that's just a pretty big
departure from what you normally see in
America. There isn't all that much
precedent for this. As you've said,
>> there's almost no precedent for these
kinds of deals in this country. There's
precedent for them in China. There's
precedent for them in Russia. There's
precedent for them in France. But we
we've always been a country that has
advocated for this idea of free market
capitalism. Having said that, it's not
exactly like free market capitalism is
somehow the most popular concept in the
world these days. And there are a lot of
people who look at the idea of free
market capitalism and say it's not
working for them. Mhm.
>> And in many ways,
Donald Trump
is puncturing the idea that free market
capitalism ever existed.
He's saying free market capitalism has
actually been a myth, that the US
government has always been subsidizing
all of these businesses in all sorts of
different ways.
And instead of pretending it's a free
market and getting nothing for it, he's
saying, "Give us something back for it."
And that very idea in America is so
provocative.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Okay, Andrew, tell us about the reaction
to these moves, to this provocative idea
that the government should get a stake
or some kind of say in the companies
that it is helping in one way or
another. Well, the real surprising part
of this in Washington is just how the
politics have almost flipped. So Bernie
Sanders, for example, loves this idea.
When the CHIPS Act was first put in
place in 2022, folks like Elizabeth
Warren and Bernie Sanders were
specifically articulating the idea that
we should be getting something for these
big grants. So, he's been out there for
years advocating the idea that
corporations should not be getting
welfare, that all of these subsidies are
bailouts, and that we shouldn't be
involved in it. And if we are, we should
be getting something for it.
>> In a way, so much of what the
president's doing is taxing corporate
America, something the Democrats have
long been advocating for.
>> It is fascinating. You know, there
there's so many ways in which Trump's
economic policies just don't fall within
traditional party politics. Tariffs
obviously being something that
Republicans don't typically favor. And
this too in a kind of dramatic way
because here you have one of the most
progressive members of Congress saying,
"Good, this is good." you know, his
approach really has pulled in a certain
subset of Democrats who look at at least
some of his policies and say, "Yeah,
that's what we should be doing." Now, on
the other end of the spectrum, while
much of the Republican establishment
has, in truth, been pretty quiet about
all this. They're not commenting on what
the president is doing, there are some
prominent conservatives who are kind of
going out of their mind about this.
Republican Senator Ran Paul criticized
the deal before it was finalized,
posting, "If socialism is government
owning the means of production, wouldn't
the government owning part of Intel be a
step towards socialism?"
>> The conservative commentators look at
this and say to themselves, "This is a
slippery slope.
>> You can't just be against socialism when
the left does it." So, if you support
socialism, apparently Donald Trump is
your guy. If you are a free market
capitalist, you do not want government
investing in public companies. It may
prioritize government goals as opposed
to profit maximization.
>> The United States is the most dynamic
economy in the world. They would argue
that capitalism across the globe has
raised people out of poverty. They would
tell you that innovation comes from
competition,
not protectionism. And once you have the
government picking winners and losers,
and that's the phrase, picking winners
and losers, you no longer have the idea
of Adam Smith's invisible hand at work.
>> Right. No more invisible hand. Now we
have the very visible hand of Donald
Trump, of the US government, the strong
arm, if you will. Exactly.
[Music]
>> So, just to do a reality check here, as
dramatic as these moves may be, there
are plenty of other countries that own
stakes in corporations that they think
are important to national security. This
happens in Europe. France and Germany
have a stake in Airbus. I covered
aerospace. That's a really successful
company. And those countries are some of
the biggest economies in the world.
>> Sure. But we've been critical of those
countries for years for that approach in
large part because we look at their
economy and we say that it doesn't grow
nearly as fast as the United States.
It's not nearly as dynamic. You're not
seeing the kind of innovation out of
Europe that you've seen out of the US
over all of these years. Where's AI come
from? Not Europe. Where did the internet
come from? Not Europe. And so I think
sure there are other places that have
economies that work to some degree, but
what's made the American experiment so
successful has been this very idea of a
quote unquote free market.
>> You're saying this kind of free market
where you limit government intervention
as much as possible, that's a key part
of America's economic identity. It also
explains our success as a country, at
least until now.
>> Well, that's the argument. And the
question is, is this just a one-off or
is this really the beginning of
something much bigger? You know, I spoke
with Kevin Hasset, who runs the National
Economic Council for the Trump
administration, and he has said, as has
the president, as has now Howard Lutnik,
Secretary of Commerce, that this is the
beginning that the administration wants
to have stakes in more businesses.
specifically has identified the idea
that defense companies may be up for
grabs in terms of the US government
taking stakes in them given how much
business the US government gives them.
You know, Loheed Martin a huge part of
their business as you might imagine. The
US government is their largest customer.
Should the taxpayer not just pay them
but have a stake in the company itself?
These are the questions. And it's not
just defense companies. Think about all
of the businesses that interact with the
US government. There are construction
companies in America whose biggest
client is the US government. Should we
own a stake in those construction
companies? And this goes then to the
competition question, which is once you
own a stake in the business, does the
competition end? M
>> meaning the next time the US government
has to choose between two companies that
it wants to use for whatever maybe it's
building an airplane maybe it's building
a building is there actually a
competition based on the lowest price
and the best service
>> or does the US government say actually
we own a 10% stake in this one so we
actually have to use this one and then
by the way longer term does the US
taxpayer actually pay more
>> but if I could push you on that just a
little bit. Some might argue that
Americans already live in a world where
competition has been stifled. You know,
there's antitrust cases against some of
the biggest tech companies in this
country. And when you think about one of
this country's biggest industries,
healthcare, there's been all this
consolidation. And I think a lot of
Americans would probably say, "Look,
we're already paying through the nose on
hospital bills and drug costs." is the
argument from critics that that would be
worse if the government owns stakes in a
lot of these companies.
>> I think the critique is that you're
right, we don't have enough competition
in this country as it is, but that this
would make it worse, not better. And
think about this. The next time a
company in which the government has a
stake wants to buy another company, how
would regulators think about that, for
example? Would they say, "Well, this is
good for the American taxpayer because
we own a stake in it."
>> Even though it would be bad for
competition,
>> you're saying it could lead to more
consolidation potentially. It just
changes the entire incentive structure
because all of a sudden the government,
the taxpayer is now an official owner in
these businesses.
>> I want to turn to the potential benefits
that we'd theoretically be getting in
exchange for these deals, including the
government stakes in private companies.
The whole argument from the Trump
administration is that ultimately they
are extracting better deals on behalf of
the US taxpayer. My question is, does
that money that the administration that
the government may be getting from
Intel, from Nvidia sales, from these
other companies, do we know how it would
actually benefit the American taxpayer?
>> Well, ostensibly the benefit would be in
the form of revenue to the government.
And if you think about the enormous
budget deficit which is in the trillions
of dollars that we have today, I mean, I
think there's no question that we
already live beyond our means. We're
already trying to find other ways to
raise revenue to pay for things. I can't
tell you where the money directly is
going to go. Will it be used for the
social safety net? Will it be used to
pay down debt? Will it be used for
infrastructure spending in the United
States? Will be used for education? I
don't think we know the answer to that
question, but the arguable benefit is
that it would go into the coffers of the
US government and the coffers need
filling. It's also worth noting that,
you know, you go back to the financial
crisis of 2008 and the US government did
rescue the banks at that time and the
automakers at that time and it was very
unpopular
>> and it was unpopular because people
thought it was a freebie. People thought
that the money was going out and was
never coming back. And the truth is that
the US government made a profit on that
money. And so the benefit was that not
only did it make a profit directly, it
also managed to prop up those companies
and businesses and keep them in
business, which kept the economy alive,
kept people in their jobs, etc. Okay,
stepping back, I think it's probably
worth noting that Trump won two
elections now on the argument that this
economic system has not worked for a
huge swath of people in this country,
that people had been left behind. They
had lost good factory jobs. And so, I
wonder if there aren't going to be
people who look at this and say, "Sure,
you may be kind of breaking the system,
but that's what I voted for. There is no
question that many Americans voted for
Trump to break the glass. That's what
they wanted him to do. They wanted him
to change the way this economy works.
Now, whether they want these specific
changes, I think is still a big
question. I think an even bigger
question is how permanent these changes
really are. You know, when I talk to
CEOs, even in the past couple of days,
they they talk about this phrase, a
generational shift that we are in the
midst of a generational shift in
capitalism. A generational shift in the
very idea of free markets where we own
these businesses for decades to come.
The decisions that get made around that
business or industry no longer have to
do with profits or employees or anything
else. It has to do with potentially the
influence of what comes from Washington.
And who knows who's going to be in the
White House? Maybe it'll be President
Trump who's influencing this. But down
the line, it could be a Democrat, could
be Bernie Sanders.
But when the government becomes an owner
in the business, that influence shifts
the direction of travel such that
business could potentially become deeply
political.
[Music]
>> Andrew, thanks so much for your time.
>> Thanks for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
In a lastminute flurry of legal action
on Sunday, a federal judge temporarily
blocked the Trump administration from
deporting Guatemalan children who had
already been put onto planes.
The judge expressed frustration with the
government, saying it was surprising
that the administration had tried to get
the minors out of the country in the wee
hours of the morning on a holiday
weekend.
A lawyer for the government said the
children were going to be reunited with
their parents in Guatemala. But a lawyer
for the children disputed that, saying
that at least some of the children
didn't want to return.
Migrant children have posed a challenge
for the Trump administration's
immigration crackdown because they're
entitled to special legal protections.
And the death toll from an earthquake
that hit Afghanistan on Sunday has
climbed to more than 800 people,
authorities said, warning that the
fatality count would likely rise.
So far, only a handful of countries have
offered humanitarian assistance to the
Taliban government. Foreign countries
have become reluctant to send aid to
Afghanistan in recent years as the
Taliban faces accusations of diverting
humanitarian assistance to their
fighters and favoring some communities
over others.
Afghanistan has been battling various
crises and hospitals have shut down
since the Trump administration
completely cut off all US foreign aid to
the country earlier this year.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Ricky
Nevetski, Stella Tan, and Carlos Prito.
It was edited by Lisa Chow and Chris Hel
and was engineered by Chris Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Natalie
Kitro. See you tomorrow.
[Music]